--- PAGE 1 ---
University of Siegen
Development of a Privacy-Aware
Proactive Social Robotic Avatar
Based on LLM for Health and
Well-being Coaching
Master’s Thesis
Ubiquitous Computing
Shubham Shinde
Matriculation number: 1699548
13. January 2025
Examiner
Prof. Dr. Kristof Van Laerhoven
University of Siegen
M.Sc. Atikkhan Nilgar
University of Siegen

--- PAGE 2 ---

--- PAGE 3 ---
This Master’s Thesis was submitted in accordance with the regulations of the Uni-
versity of Siegen for the degree of Master of Science (M. Sc.)
according to the
examination regulations FPO 2021.
Examiner
Prof. Dr. Kristof Van Laerhoven
M.Sc. Atikkhan Nilgar

--- PAGE 4 ---

--- PAGE 5 ---
Declaration of Originality
I affirm that I have written my thesis independently and that I have not used
any sources or aids other than those indicated, and that I have clearly indicated
citations.
All passages that are taken from other works in terms of wording or meaning (includ-
ing translations) have been clearly marked as borrowed in each individual case, with
precise indication of the source (including the World Wide Web and other electronic
data collections). This also applies to attached drawings, pictorial representations,
sketches and the like. I take note that the proven omission of the indication of origin
will be considered as attempted deception.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Location, Date
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Signature
Cologne, 13 Jan 2025

--- PAGE 6 ---

--- PAGE 7 ---
Abstract
Human-computer interaction has exciting new potential; thanks to the quick ad-
vancements in machine learning (ML) and artificial intelligence (AI), particularly in
the healthcare industry. This thesis presents the design, development, and evalua-
tion of a privacy-aware proactive social robotic avatar aimed at enhancing health and
well-being coaching. The proposed system leverages large language models (LLMs)
to facilitate multi-modal interactions, allowing users to engage through text input,
voice input, and voice commands.
A key element of this research is human-robot interaction (HRI), which focuses on
how people naturally and intuitively engage and communicate with robotic systems.
The integration of LLMs in HRI enables the robotic avatar to understand and re-
spond to user inputs more effectively, creating a seamless interaction experience.
However, there are serious privacy issues with AI’s application in HRI, especially
when handling private health information. This thesis addresses these concerns by
implementing robust privacy measures designed to protect user data from unautho-
rized access and misuse.
Key objectives include ensuring robust privacy measures for handling health data,
providing real-time feedback, and evaluating user experience through standardized
metrics.
The research addresses significant gaps in existing literature regarding
the integration of LLMs in privacy-critical environments, the effectiveness of multi-
modal interactions, and the evaluation of user experiences across different communi-
cation modes. This work aims to increase user-robotic system trust by emphasizing
privacy, which is crucial for the broad adoption of AI-driven healthcare solutions.
This work intends to advance the area of social robotics by providing a framework
for creating systems that prioritize data privacy while simultaneously improving
user engagement using an all-encompassing strategy that blends cutting-edge AI
technologies with user-centric design concepts. The findings of this research have the
potential to influence future developments in HRI, ensuring that privacy concerns are
adequately addressed while maximizing the benefits of AI in healthcare settings.
In summary, this thesis investigates the ethical issues surrounding the use of AI in
delicate settings in addition to the technical requirements of creating a social robotic
avatar. This study offers important insights into the future of human-robot inter-
action in healthcare by striking a balance between innovation and privacy, opening
the door for more safe and efficient AI applications.
Keywords: Social Robotics, Large Language Models (LLMs), Human-Robot Interaction, Artifi-
cial Intelligence, Conversational AI

--- PAGE 8 ---

--- PAGE 9 ---
Contents
List of Figures
1
List of Tables
3
List of Listings
5
List of Abbreviations
7
1
Introduction
9
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.2
Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.3
Objective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.4
Approach
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.5
Outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2
Related Work
13
2.1
Social Robots in Healthcare . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2
Large Language Models in Social Robots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3
Privacy-Aware Systems in Healthcare Applications . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4
Multi-Modal Interaction in Social Robots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.5
Gaps in Existing Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3
System Design and Architecture
17
3.1
Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
High-Level Architecture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2.1
Frontend Layer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2.2
Backend Layer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2.3
Large Language Model (LLM) Layer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.3
Workflow
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4
Implementation
25
4.1
Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2
Frontend Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2.1
Social Robot Screen
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2.2
Control Panel Screen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.3
Backend Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.3.1
Database
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.4
Large Language Model Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.4.1
Running Ollama on OMNI Cluster
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.4.2
Model Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
I

--- PAGE 10 ---
CONTENTS
4.4.3
Accessing Ollama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.5
User Interaction Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5
User Study
35
5.1
Study Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.2
Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6
Evaluation
39
6.1
Study Results Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.2
Communication Mode-Level Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6.2.1
Key Observations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
7
Discussion
43
7.1
Interpretation of Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
7.2
Implications for Social Robot Design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
7.3
Privacy Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
7.4
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
7.5
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
8
Conclusion
47
Bibliography
49
Appendix
53
II

--- PAGE 11 ---
List of Figures
3.1
Social Robot Screen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2
Control Panel Screen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3
System Workflow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.1
User Interaction Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
6.1
Demographic Distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.2
Communication Modes Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
1

--- PAGE 12 ---

--- PAGE 13 ---
List of Tables
4.1
Major node.js packages used in Frontend Implementation . . . . . . .
27
4.2
Major Python packages used in Backend Implementation . . . . . . .
29
4.3
Language Models Used in the Study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
6.1
Statistical Summary of Communication Modes . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3

--- PAGE 14 ---

--- PAGE 15 ---
List of Listings
4.1
Slurm job scheduling script (run_ollama.sh)
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.2
Bash script for forwarding local port to OMNI Cluster’s GPU Node .
32
5

--- PAGE 16 ---

--- PAGE 17 ---
List of Abbreviations
AI
Artificial Intelligence
API
Application Programming Interface
ASGI
Asynchronous Server Gateway Interface
GPU
Graphics Processing Unit
HRI
Human-Robot Interaction
HTTP
Hypertext Transfer Protocol
IQR
Interquartile Range
JSON
JavaScript Object Notation
LLM
Large Language Model
REST
Representational State Transfer
SDK
Software Development Kit
UI
User Interface
UEQ
User Experience Questionnaire
URL
Uniform Resource Locator
UX
User Experience
WebSocket
Web Socket Protocol
7

--- PAGE 18 ---

--- PAGE 19 ---
1 Introduction
The latest advancements in artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML)
have opened up exciting new possibilities for how humans interact with robots,
particularly in healthcare. Social robots, which are autonomous systems designed
to interact with humans in a natural and engaging manner [1], are increasingly being
deployed to address mental and physical well-being. These robots aim to bridge the
gap between technology and personal care by providing proactive, empathetic, and
privacy-aware assistance [2].
Another subset of social robots, virtual avatars, are gaining prominence [3] as they
offer unique advantages in human-computer interaction. These avatars can be de-
signed to exhibit human-like characteristics and behaviors, making them effective
in creating engaging and relatable interactions [4]. By simulating human presence,
virtual avatars can serve as social robots that provide companionship, support, and
guidance in various contexts, including healthcare. They are simple to incorporate
into digital systems, enabling flexible and scalable deployment across many contexts
and devices.
The integration of Large Language Models (LLMs) into social robots has signifi-
cantly enhanced their ability to understand and generate human-like responses [5].
These models, trained on vast datasets, enable robots to process complex queries
and provide contextually relevant answers, making them ideal companions for health
coaching, which involves guiding individuals to achieve their health goals through
personalized advice and support [6]. However, deploying such systems in sensitive
domains, like health, poses critical challenges.
This thesis focuses on the development of a proactive social robotic avatar designed
to coach users on heart health, walking steps, and sleep patterns. By leveraging
an LLM as the core engine, combined with real-time voice and text interaction
capabilities, the robot offers personalized health recommendations. A web-based
interface serves as the primary interaction medium, enabling users to ask health-
related queries using one of three modes of communication: text input, voice input
via a button, and voice commands triggered by a wake word.
1.1 Motivation
Health and well-being are integral to leading a productive and fulfilling life. How-
ever, maintaining a healthy lifestyle remains a challenge for many due to lack of
motivation, awareness, and personalized guidance. Social robots have emerged as
a promising solution to bridge this gap by providing real-time support and encour-
agement tailored to individual needs [7].
9

--- PAGE 20 ---
Introduction
Recent advancements in Large Language Models (LLMs) have revolutionized how
social robots can interact with humans. Studies have shown that integrating LLMs
with social robots can enhance their empathetic capabilities through both verbal
and non-verbal cues [8]. These robots can now generate contextually appropriate
responses while expressing emotions through facial expressions, gestures, and voice
modulation, making interactions more natural and engaging.
The success of platforms like QTrobot demonstrates the potential of combining
speech recognition, emotion analysis, and LLMs to create meaningful human-robot
interactions [9]. Such systems have proven particularly effective in specialized appli-
cations, including education, therapy, and healthcare support. Building upon these
foundations, researchers have explored various approaches to make social robots
more emotionally intelligent and responsive to users’ needs [5].
Despite these advances, there remain significant gaps in privacy-aware, proactive,
and adaptable systems that can cater to sensitive domains like healthcare. Tradi-
tional systems often fail to create meaningful and engaging interactions, and users
are hesitant to share personal data due to privacy concerns.
The integration of
wearable devices with social robots has shown promise in monitoring and supporting
emotional wellbeing [7], but maintaining user privacy while providing personalized
support remains a challenge.
Increased conversationality, empathy, and informationalness in human-computer in-
teraction are made possible by the quick development of LLMs. These developments,
along with the increasing demand for easily available healthcare help, encourage the
creation of a system that combines state-of-the-art LLMs with a user-centered design
to produce a health coach that is safe, proactive, and efficient.
1.2 Problem Statement
There are several issues with using social robotic avatars for health coaching that
must be thoroughly resolved. One of the foremost concerns is privacy. Users are
often reluctant to share their personal health data due to privacy issues, making it
imperative to implement robust data privacy measures to build and maintain user
trust [10].
Another critical challenge is achieving seamless real-time interaction,
particularly when it comes to voice commands. This is often hindered by latency
and processing delays, which can disrupt the user experience.
Furthermore, the system must be designed to accommodate user adaptability, as
individuals have varying levels of comfort and familiarity with technology.
This
means the system should be versatile enough to cater to a diverse user base, includ-
ing those who may not be technologically savvy [11][12]. Another essential element
is contextual understanding, since the robot must correctly understand user queries
and provide appropriate answers. Sophisticated natural language processing skills
are needed to make sure that conversations are productive and meaningful. Addi-
tionally, the robot should not only be reactive but also proactive in its engagement
with users. It should be capable of initiating interactions to provide timely health
advice and reminders, thereby enhancing the overall user experience. Also, many
10

--- PAGE 21 ---
Introduction
existing social robots focus on hardware-based interactions, as summarized in the
Awesome Social Robots GitHub repository [13], which predominantly lists hardware
robots with limited generalization for web-based implementations.
The successful deployment of a social robotic avatar that can help users provide
individualized health coaching requires addressing these complex issues.
1.3 Objective
The primary objective of this research is to design, develop, and evaluate a privacy-
aware proactive social robotic avatar capable of coaching users on various health
aspects, including but not limited to heart health, walking steps, and sleep patterns.
The robot should:
• Support multi-modal interaction: Enable users to interact using three
communication modes: text input, voice input, and voice command, while
ensuring seamless and real-time feedback.
• Leverage advanced AI: Process user queries and deliver contextually ap-
propriate answers by integrating an LLM.
• Ensure privacy: Protect private health information and increase user trust
with strong privacy protections in place.
• Evaluate user experience: Use standardized criteria such as the User Expe-
rience Questionnaire (UEQ) survey [14] to evaluate the robot’s communication
modes.
1.4 Approach
The approach described below is used to accomplish the specified goals:
1. System architecture:
• Design a modular architecture comprising a backend powered by an LLM,
a frontend interface for user interaction, and cloud-based services for data
processing
• Implement WebSocket-based real-time communication for seamless audio
and text interaction
2. Interaction modes:
• Develop three distinct communication modes:
– Text Input: Users type their queries into a chat interface
– Voice Input: Users click a button to activate voice recording and
submit queries
– Voice Command: Users interact using a wake word to trigger the
robot
11

--- PAGE 22 ---
Introduction
3. Privacy mechanisms:
• Ensure that all data processing adheres to privacy-by-design principles
[15]
• Minimize data retention and use secure protocols for data transmission
and storage
4. Evaluation:
• Conduct a UEQ survey to gather feedback from users on their experience
with the three communication modes
• Analyze the results to identify strengths and areas for improvement
1.5 Outline
The structure of this thesis is organized as follows:
• Chapter 2: Related Work - A review of existing research on social robots,
and privacy-aware systems.
• Chapter 3: System Design and Architecture - A detailed description of the
system architecture and design choices.
• Chapter 4: Implementation - A breakdown of the procedure that includes
technical information and code snippets.
• Chapter 5: User Study - A detailed description of the user study conducted
to evaluate the communication modes.
• Chapter 6: Evaluation - A discussion of the testing methodologies and eval-
uation results.
• Chapter 7: Discussion - A discussion of the findings and suggestions for
future work.
• Chapter 8: Conclusion - A summary of the findings and suggestions for future
work.
The goal of this work is to advance the field of social robots by offering a framework
for creating privacy-aware systems that protect personal data while improving user
experience.
12

--- PAGE 23 ---
2 Related Work
The development of conversational social robots for health and well-being coaching
draws from multiple fields, including robotics, natural language processing, privacy-
aware systems, and user experience design. This chapter reviews existing literature
and resources, contextualizing their relevance to the proposed system.
2.1 Social Robots in Healthcare
Social robots have played a transformative role in healthcare by providing personal-
ized assistance, emotional support, and motivation for patients managing physical
or mental health conditions. Robots like QTrobot by LuxAI [9] have demonstrated
capabilities in speech recognition, emotion detection, and interaction customization
using language models like GPT-based systems. QTrobot’s integration of emotion
recognition and translation highlights its potential as a conversational agent for
personalized care [9].
Recent research by Nilgar et al. [16] investigated users’ perceptions of privacy regard-
ing disclosures made by robotic coaching assistants. Their study with 22 participants
evaluated various types of information disclosure and the robot’s role, ranging from
active on-demand to proactive communication conditions. This work emphasizes
the importance of considering privacy and appropriateness in robot-human interac-
tions, particularly when robots serve as supportive entities during coaching sessions
and share insights about users’ well-being and activity [16].
Open-source robotic platforms have enabled researchers to design and develop tai-
lored social robots for specific use cases. For instance, the study by Vrochidou et al.
explores how such platforms can be adapted, emphasizing modular and scalable
architectures [17].
Prior research at the MIT Media Lab has demonstrated the potential of combining
wearable devices with social robots for emotional wellbeing interventions [7]. Their
technology used a Jibo robot that was connected to a Fitbit smartwatch to track
users’ emotional states and deliver real-time, tailored responses. The project high-
lighted how wearable sensor data could enable social robots to better understand
users’ underlying emotional states and deliver more contextually appropriate, empa-
thetic responses. Our study expands on this theory by using sophisticated LLMs to
process wearable data streams and produce more complex, customized interactions.
While the MIT system primarily focused on emotional well-being, our approach ex-
pands the scope to include comprehensive health coaching by integrating data from
wearables.
13

--- PAGE 24 ---
Related Work
2.2 Large Language Models in Social Robots
Large Language Models (LLMs) are transforming the design and capabilities of
social robots by providing these machines with advanced natural language under-
standing and generation capabilities [5]. Social robots, traditionally programmed
with fixed responses and limited contextual awareness, can now leverage LLMs to
interpret human language more intuitively and engage in fluid, meaningful conver-
sations [18].
LLMs enable social robots to understand nuanced questions, infer context from prior
interactions, and respond with personalized insights. For instance, a social robot
created for health and wellbeing coaching may understand the intent of a user’s
question regarding their heart health or step count, analyze it, and give contextually
relevant feedback. Beyond answering questions, LLMs can also allow these robots
to proactively suggest health tips, track patterns in a user’s data, and adapt their
communication style to suit individual preferences.
By integrating LLMs with real-time sensory data, social robots are no longer con-
fined to rigid, task-specific functions. Instead, they evolve into dynamic, interactive
companions capable of adapting to diverse scenarios, whether it’s fostering engage-
ment, offering coaching, or providing emotional support. However, as these robots
proliferate, concerns like protecting user privacy and reducing reaction biases con-
tinue to require careful thought.
In fields like health and personal assistance, where empathy, flexibility, and trust
are essential, the combination of LLMs and social robotics has the potential to
completely transform human-robot interaction.
2.3 Privacy-Aware Systems in Healthcare
Applications
Privacy is a critical consideration in deploying social robots for sensitive applica-
tions such as healthcare. There are significant concerns about the security of private
health data when social robots are used in healthcare settings.
Existing frame-
works emphasize data anonymization, encryption, and privacy-by-design principles,
as outlined in studies like that by Khalid et al., which discusses various techniques
for preserving privacy in AI applications within healthcare environments [15]. These
techniques are essential for ensuring that sensitive patient data is not compromised
during interactions with social robots.
Robots like QTrobot incorporate mechanisms to safeguard user data, including
secure data transmission protocols and user consent management systems. How-
ever, their privacy-preserving capabilities in conjunction with large language models
(LLMs) remain underexplored. The integration of LLMs into social robots presents
unique challenges, particularly in maintaining user privacy while leveraging the ad-
vanced capabilities of these models.
For instance, while LLMs can enhance the
14

--- PAGE 25 ---
Related Work
conversational abilities of robots, they also require access to user data to provide
personalized responses, which can conflict with privacy requirements.
2.4 Multi-Modal Interaction in Social Robots
Research has consistently highlighted the importance of multimodal interaction in
enhancing the accessibility and engagement of social robots [19]. By integrating
various communication modes, social robots can better cater to diverse user needs
and preferences, making interactions more engaging and user-centric.
Furhat Robotics SDK is a well-known platform for developing humanoid robots
software, with a primary focus on voice-based communication. It provides powerful
capabilities for developing dynamic and captivating user experiences. A key strength
of Furhat Robotics lies in its ability to integrate seamlessly with external services,
such as large language models (LLMs), enabling advanced language understanding
and natural response generation. These capabilities make it a valuable platform
for building conversational systems, particularly in applications requiring dynamic,
context-aware responses [20].
Similarly, the Flex SDK introduces an additional dimension to social robots by al-
lowing the creation of expressive, avatar-based interfaces. These interfaces leverage
facial expressions and emotions, enhancing user engagement and providing an intu-
itive communication experience [21]. This feature is particularly valuable in health-
care applications, where empathetic interaction and emotional understanding can
significantly impact user satisfaction and adherence to prescribed therapies. Studies
suggest that expressive avatars can effectively convey empathy, making them ideal
for social robots designed for health and well-being coaching [22].
In addition to interaction modalities and expressiveness, emotion recognition is a
critical component in developing truly interactive and context-aware social robots.
The LuxAI Qtrobot stands out in this domain, with built-in capabilities for detecting
user emotions and translating them into appropriate responses. This functionality
can complement multimodal interaction systems, enabling robots to adapt their
communication style based on the user’s emotional state [9]. Such advancements
not only improve the robot’s ability to engage with users but also make it a valuable
tool for therapeutic and coaching scenarios in health-related applications [23].
2.5 Gaps in Existing Research
Even though social robotics and large language models have advanced significantly,
there are still a number of important topics that need more research. The review of
existing literature and tools reveals several gaps:
• Limited exploration of social robots that integrate LLMs with multi-modal
interaction capabilities.
• A lack of privacy-aware conversational agents for healthcare domains.
15

--- PAGE 26 ---
Related Work
• Inadequate integration of privacy-preserving mechanisms with LLM-driven
conversational systems.
• Insufficient user experience evaluations focusing on communication mode com-
parisons.
16

--- PAGE 27 ---
3 System Design and Architecture
In this chapter, the design and architecture of a privacy-aware, proactive, social
robotic avatar system developed for health and well-being coaching is described.
The system is designed to integrate multiple modalities, including voice and text,
with seamless interaction with a large language model (LLM). A layered and modular
architecture ensures scalability, real-time interaction, and user data privacy.
Being a browser-based system, both the social robot and control panel can be ac-
cessed through any modern web browser, providing easy accessibility across different
devices and platforms without requiring specialized hardware or software installa-
tion. The social robot’s interface is rendered directly in the browser window, allow-
ing users to interact with it through their preferred device, whether it be a desktop
computer, laptop, tablet, or smartphone. This browser-centric approach ensures
maximum flexibility and removes barriers to entry, as users only need an internet
connection and a web browser to engage with the system.
3.1 Terminology
Before delving into the architecture of the system, it is essential to clarify key terms
used throughout the description to ensure a common understanding:
• Avatar: The visual representation of the robot.
• User/End user: The person who uses the system and communicates with
the robot.
• Administrator: The administrator of the system who manages the robot’s
settings and configurations.
• Communication: Refers to the interaction between the end user and the
robot. Each communication is identified in the system by a human-readable
unique id.
• Communication mode: The mode of communication, such as text input,
voice input, and voice commands. Each mode facilitates a unique way for the
user to engage with the robot.
• Communication language: The language in which the communication with
the robot is conducted.
• Communication ID: The human-readable string with which the communi-
cation is uniquely identified in the system.
17

--- PAGE 28 ---
System Design and Architecture
• Communication configuration: The settings for a communication, such as
human readable unique id for the communication, the avatar, communication
modes, the integrated large language model, communication language, and the
gender of the output voice.
3.2 High-Level Architecture
The system follows a modular and layered architecture, facilitating easy integration
of various components while maintaining separation of concerns. The architecture
comprises three primary layers:
• Frontend Layer
• Backend Layer
• Large Language Model Layer
3.2.1 Frontend Layer
The frontend layer or the user interface layer is the primary layer where the end
user or the administrator of the system interacts with the system. It is divided into
two separate interfaces:
• Social Robot Screen (for end users)
• Control Panel Screen (for administrator)
Both interfaces are web-based applications built with modern web technologies,
ensuring cross-platform compatibility and ease of access.
3.2.1.1 Social Robot Screen
The social robot screen is the main interface via which the user interacts with
the robot. This web-based interface enables users to engage with the robot either
through spoken communication or by typing in the chat interface, depending on the
communication modes configured by the administrator via the control panel screen.
The robot processes the user’s input and provides an appropriate response.
The primary functions of the social robot screen are:
• Display avatar and controls: Displays the robot’s avatar and the input
controls.
• User input capture: Accepts user input in text or voice form.
• Input forwarding: Sends the user’s input to the backend layer for processing
by the large language model.
• Response generation: Responds to the user’s input with a generated re-
sponse.
Figure 3.1 shows the social robot screen with the text and voice input capabilities
enabled.
18

--- PAGE 29 ---
System Design and Architecture
Figure 3.1: Social Robot Screen showing the interface for user interaction with text
and voice input capabilities enabled. The screen displays the robot’s
avatar and input controls.
3.2.1.2 Control Panel Screen
The control panel screen serves as the administrative interface, allowing the ad-
ministrator to manage the robot’s settings and customize its behavior as displayed
on the social robot screen. This web-based interface provides control over various
parameters such as the robot’s avatar, communication modes, the integrated large
language model, communication language, and the gender of the voice.
The key functions of the control panel screen are:
• Avatar selection: Allows the administrator to choose a specific avatar for
the robot’s representation.
• Input management: Enables or disables the robot’s text and voice input
capabilities based on requirements.
• LLM selection: Facilitates the selection of the large language model for
generating responses.
• Language preference: Provides the option to select the communication
language.
• Voice gender configuration: Offers the choice of selecting a male, female,
or neutral voice for text-to-speech output.
Figure 3.2 shows the control panel screen.
19

--- PAGE 30 ---
System Design and Architecture
Figure 3.2: Control Panel Screen showing the interface for administrator to man-
age the robot’s settings and configurations.
3.2.2 Backend Layer
The system’s backend layer acts as its main processing unit, coordinating data
flow between the control panel screen, the large language model (LLM), and the
social robot screen. It is responsible for managing user inputs, processing data, and
forwarding the responses generated by the large language model to the social robot
screen.
The key functions of the backend layer are:
• Create new communication: Creates a new communication via the control
panel screen.
• Input processing: Takes input from the social robot screen (speech or text)
and transforms it into a format that can be processed further.
• Speech-to-Text integration: For voice inputs, the backend integrates with
the Google Speech-to-Text API to transcribe audio into text.
• Language model interaction: Sends processed text inputs to the LLM for
natural language understanding and response generation.
• Response handling: Retrieves responses from the LLM and prepares them
for further processing.
• Text-to-Speech integration: Converts the generated text response into
speech using the Google Text-to-Speech API.
• Parameter configuration: Implements the settings configured via the con-
trol panel, such as selected LLM, communication language, or voice gender.
20

--- PAGE 31 ---
System Design and Architecture
• WebSocket management: Facilitates real-time communication within the
social robot screen for transmitting audio streams and responses and within
the control panel screen for transmitting the communication configuration.
• Database management: Manages the database for storing user data, con-
versation history, and parameters of the robot such as the LLM, communica-
tion language, and voice gender.
The backend layer ensures a seamless and responsive interaction experience by serv-
ing as a link between the user interface and the system’s advanced processing capa-
bilities.
3.2.3 Large Language Model (LLM) Layer
The Large Language Model (LLM) layer is responsible for advanced natural language
understanding and response generation. Given the high computational requirements
of running LLMs, this layer operates on a separate GPU-enabled server to handle
the memory-intensive and compute-heavy tasks efficiently.
Architecture and Functionality:
• GPU-enabled server: The LLM runs on a server equipped with GPUs,
allowing for high-performance computation required for natural language pro-
cessing tasks. This setup ensures that the system can handle complex queries
and generate responses with low latency.
• Exposed API endpoint: The LLM layer provides a RESTful API that the
backend layer consumes. The API endpoint facilitates seamless integration by
accepting input queries and returning generated responses.
• Model selection: The API includes functionality for selecting the desired
language model, enabling flexibility in choosing between models based on per-
formance, accuracy, or resource requirements.
• Scalable deployment: The server configuration supports scalability, ensur-
ing that multiple requests from users can be handled concurrently without
impacting performance.
• High availability: Because the LLM layer is isolated, the architecture makes
sure that even in the event that the LLM experiences high usage, it won’t have
an immediate impact on the backend or user interfaces’ operation.
3.3 Workflow
As shown in the Figure 3.3, the system consists of three interconnected layers: the
frontend layer, the backend layer, and the large language model layer. These layers
work in synergy to deliver an interactive and intelligent user experience.
The workflow begins when the administrator accesses the control panel screen via a
web browser. Upon opening the control panel, a unique communication ID is cre-
ated to represent the session. The administrator can configure the robot’s settings,
21

--- PAGE 32 ---
System Design and Architecture
Figure 3.3: System Workflow illustrating the interaction between the frontend,
backend, and large language model layers.
such as selecting the avatar, enabling or disabling communication modes (text or
voice), choosing the integrated large language model, specifying the communication
language, and setting the gender of the voice. When the “Connect Bot” button is
clicked (as shown in Figure 3.2), a new communication session is initialized, and
the status on the control panel updates to indicate that the bot is connected. For
subsequent usage or modifications, the communication session and its settings are
stored in the database.
Once the robot is connected, the end-user can access the social robot screen via
their web browser. The social robot screen allows users to interact with the robot by
providing input through either text or voice, depending on the communication modes
enabled by the administrator. Voice inputs are first encoded into base64 format.
The captured input, whether text or voice, in the string format is transmitted to
the backend layer via WebSocket.
The backend processes the input based on the communication configuration as de-
fined by the administrator. In case of voice input from the user, the input is first
transcribed into text using the Google Speech-to-Text API. The input along with
the context of the conversation, if available, is then sent to the large language model
layer for response generation.
At the large language model layer, the input is processed by a high-performance
LLM hosted on a GPU-enabled server. The user’s input and the current context of
the conversation, as received from the backend, are used by the LLM to generate a
response. This LLM or the server itself does not store any user data or conversation
history. This response is then returned to the backend via API endpoints exposed
by the GPU server. The backend gets the response from the LLM in text format.
This text response is converted into speech using the Google Text-to-Speech API
and sent back to the social robot screen via WebSocket in base64 format. On the
social robot screen, the response is decoded from base64 format and response audio
is played out.
22

--- PAGE 33 ---
System Design and Architecture
The backend layer also handles the conversation history. The conversation history
is stored in the database and is retrieved from the database when the user starts
communicating with the robot using the same communication id.
Throughout the process, the social robot screen dynamically updates the robot’s
avatar to reflect its current status, such as listening, processing, or responding. This
ensures a seamless and engaging user experience.
The administrator can adjust
the robot’s configurations at any time using the control panel screen, making the
workflow flexible and adaptable to various scenarios.
The detailed implementation of the system is described in Chapter 4.
23

--- PAGE 34 ---

--- PAGE 35 ---
4 Implementation
This chapter describes the specifics of the system’s implementation. It elaborates on
the technologies used, the development process, and the core functionalities imple-
mented in each layer of the system architecture. The chapter focuses on the backend,
frontend, database, and large language model integration, providing a comprehen-
sive view of the practical realization of the design.
4.1 Overview
The implementation of the system was guided by the architecture defined in Chapter
3. The system is divided into three primary layers: the frontend layer, the backend
layer, and the large language model layer. Each layer was developed and integrated
with technologies best suited to its specific functionality.
4.2 Frontend Implementation
The frontend is implemented as a browser-based application using JavaScript. The
development environment utilizes node.js (v20.15.0) and yarn (v1.22.22) as
the package manager. It comprises two web-based interfaces: the social robot screen
and the control panel screen.
4.2.1 Social Robot Screen
The social robot screen is implemented using React.js to deliver a dynamic and
interactive interface for end-users. React.js is a JavaScript library for building user
interfaces [24]. This web-based interface captures user input in two formats: text
and voice. Text input is entered directly through an input field, while voice input
is recorded using the browser’s MediaRecorder API [25]. The text is directly sent
to the backend via a WebSocket connection while a base64 encoded string of the
voice recording is sent to the backend in case of voice input. If the proactive mode
is enabled via the control panel, the browser’s SpeechRecognition API [26] is used
to capture the user’s voice input and is continuously running in the background;
if the voice transcript contains the “Hey bot” phrase, the speech recognition stops
listening to the user’s input and the MediaRecorder API is triggered to capture
further input.
25

--- PAGE 36 ---
Implementation
Real-time communication between the social robot and backend is achieved through
a WebSocket connection, ensuring smooth and instantaneous interaction for both
input types. The robot’s screen dynamically updates the mouth movements to re-
flect its current status, whether speaking or not. Additionally, the eyes blink to
indicate the robot’s interactions, and the robot moves up and down in a mild mode
to show that the screen is functioning properly. Other states of the system such
as listening, processing, or responding are also reflected in the robot’s screen. This
feature was implemented using Redux for state management, handling not only
the mouth animations but also system-wide states such as bot connectivity status,
WebSocket connection status, and voice recording states. Redux is a state man-
agement library for JavaScript applications [27]. It’s centralized state management
enables a responsive and engaging user experience while maintaining consistency
across the application. The WebSocket client implementation utilizes the browser’s
native WebSocket API [28], providing reliable real-time communication without ad-
ditional dependencies.
When the backend processes the input and sends a response, the social robot screen
decodes the received base64 encoded string and plays the audio. Irrespective of the
communication mode, the response is given as audio. This dual-mode input func-
tionality enhances accessibility and adaptability to user preferences. The implemen-
tation prioritizes real-time interaction and seamless integration with the backend,
providing a fluid and engaging experience for users interacting with the robot.
4.2.2 Control Panel Screen
The control panel screen (Figure 3.2) serves as the administrative interface for config-
uring and managing the social robot. Built using React.js, this web-based interface
provides administrators with intuitive controls for adjusting various parameters of
the robot’s behavior and appearance.
Upon accessing the control panel, the administrator can initialize a communication
session by clicking the “Connect Bot” button. This action generates a unique human-
readable communication ID (e.g., pavug-rumal), which is stored in the database
alongside its default or customized configurations. The human-readable format fa-
cilitates easy connection from the social robot screen, which can be accessed from any
computer on the same network by providing the communication ID as a URL query
parameter (e.g., http://localhost:5000/?communication_id=pavug-rumal). The
status of the robot is updated in real-time, displaying whether the bot is connected
or disconnected.
The interface allows the administrator to configure multiple settings, including
selecting the robot’s avatar, enabling or disabling text and voice communication
modes, choosing the integrated large language model, selecting the communication
language, and defining the gender of the robot’s voice.
Each selection sends an
update to the backend server via a WebSocket connection.
Real-time feedback is provided on the control panel through periodic status updates
sent from the backend every 5 seconds via WebSocket. These updates include the
26

--- PAGE 37 ---
Implementation
robot’s current configuration and the operational status. The backend sends a JSON
payload containing the latest state information, ensuring administrators are contin-
uously informed of any changes or issues. This automated feedback loop enhances
usability by providing consistent monitoring capabilities and immediate visibility
into system changes. Through its user-friendly design and robust WebSocket in-
tegration with 5-second intervals, the control panel ensures efficient, timely, and
flexible management of the social robot.
Table 4.1 shows the major node.js packages used in the frontend implementation.
Package
Version
Description
react
^18.3.1
A JavaScript library for
building user interfaces
react-redux
^9.1.2
A JavaScript library for UI
state management
@reduxjs/toolkit
^2.2.7
Toolset for efficient Redux
development
sass
^1.77.7
CSS Extension for styling the
webpage
typescript
^5.5.4
JavaScript extension for
strong typing
Table 4.1: Major node.js packages used in Frontend Implementation
4.3 Backend Implementation
The backend implementation is developed using FastAPI, a lightweight and high-
performance web framework [29].
It serves as the core processing engine of the
system, managing requests from the frontend, facilitating communication with the
large language model (LLM), and interacting with the database for storing and
retrieving configurations and communication data. The backend is structured for
simplicity and extensibility, leveraging modern Python tools to ensure robust and
maintainable code.
Package management in the backend is handled using Poetry [30], which simpli-
fies dependency management and ensures consistency across environments.
The
backend is served using Uvicorn [31], a fast ASGI server implementation, making
it well-suited for asynchronous communication. Strict typing and data validation
are achieved using Pydantic [32], a powerful library integrated with FastAPI for
modeling data structures.
The backend integrates with Google Cloud APIs to enable text-to-speech and speech-
to-text capabilities. These APIs facilitate natural and seamless voice communica-
tion. MongoDB is used as the database system, with PyMongo [33] serving as the
client for managing data storage, ensuring efficient and flexible database interac-
tions.
27

--- PAGE 38 ---
Implementation
Since the system is designed for use over a local network, no authentication or
authorization mechanisms are currently implemented. However, if the system needs
to be deployed globally over the internet in the future, such mechanisms can be
integrated to ensure security.
The backend operates by exposing several RESTful API endpoints and WebSocket
connections for real-time communication. When the system initializes, the backend
generates human-readable unique communication IDs to manage the interaction
session. The words from the human-readable communication ID (e.g., pavug-rumal)
have no dictionary meaning. They are just random words that are easy to remember
and pronounce. The idea was borrowed from the work of Wilkerson [34]. These
sessions, along with their configurations, are stored in the MongoDB database for
persistence.
The backend maintains simultaneous WebSocket connections with both the social
robot and the control panel.
When administrators make configuration changes
through the control panel, these changes are immediately persisted to the Mon-
goDB database and forwarded to the social robot if it is currently connected. The
social robot and control panel operate independently, with the backend serving as
the central coordination point. This decoupled architecture means that if the social
robot is not yet connected when configuration changes are made via the control
panel, the changes are still saved to the database. Once the social robot establishes
a connection, it automatically fetches and applies the latest configuration settings
from the backend. When the social robot establishes a WebSocket connection, it
automatically retrieves any available conversation history from MongoDB. This con-
versation history data is loaded into the system’s memory to provide context for
ongoing interactions.
The conversation history is updated in the database as new interactions occur,
ensuring that the context remains current while maintaining a manageable and
relevant scope of historical information.
This approach enhances the quality of
discussions by making them more contextually aware and personally tailored to
each user’s ongoing health journey.
Voice-based interactions follow a particular workflow in which the Google Cloud
Speech-to-Text API is used to first transform the user’s voice input to text. After
the resulting text has been processed by the LLM, it is delivered to the user after
being converted back to speech via the Google Cloud Text-to-Speech API. Text-
based interactions bypass the input speech-processing steps (because the input is
already in text form), making the workflow more streamlined for these cases.
The backend is designed to maintain low latency in interactions, especially for real-
time communication via WebSocket connections. It manages communication modes
such as voice or text, and it coordinates with the frontend to reflect changes in
settings such as the robot’s avatar, voice gender, or the selected LLM model. While
the current implementation is focused on local network deployment, the modular
architecture ensures that additional features, such as security layers or support for
external integrations, can be added seamlessly in future iterations. Table 4.2 shows
the major python v(3.12) packages used in the backend implementation.
28

--- PAGE 39 ---
Implementation
Package
Version
Description
fastapi
^0.111.1
Web Framework for building
APIs with Python
uvicorn
^0.30.3
ASGI server implementation,
for serving FastAPI APIs
pydantic
^2.8.2
Data validation and settings
management using Python type
annotations
google-cloud-speech
^2.27.0
Google’s speech-to-text python
client
google-cloud-
texttospeech
^2.17.2
Google’s text-to-speech python
client
pymongo
^4.10.1
Python Driver for MongoDB
Database
proquint
^0.2.1
Implementation of
human-readable IDs
Table 4.2: Major Python packages used in Backend Implementation
4.3.1 Database
The application utilizes MongoDB, a NoSQL database system, for data persistence
and management. MongoDB’s document-oriented architecture was specifically cho-
sen to accommodate the varying context and requirements of different AI models
that may be integrated into the system. Unlike traditional relational databases that
require rigid schema definitions, MongoDB’s flexible schema allows for storing di-
verse types of data structures that different AI models might need, without requiring
database schema modifications.
Docker is used to containerize the database, which makes deployment uniform across
many environments and streamlines the setup procedure. This containerization ap-
proach also facilitates easy scaling and management of the database instance. The
MongoDB container is configured to persist data even after container restarts by
utilizing Docker volumes, ensuring that valuable conversation histories and config-
uration data are preserved.
The database structure is organized into collections that store different types of
data:
• Communications collection: Stores the conversation specific configurations in
the communications collection.
• Chat Messages collection: Maintains conversation histories, including LLM
Model used, timestamps, user inputs, and AI responses in the chat_messages
collection.
• Activities collection: Stores user’s heart health, sleep and steps data in the
activities collection.
29

--- PAGE 40 ---
Implementation
The flexible document structure of MongoDB proves particularly advantageous when
storing conversation histories, as it can easily accommodate varying lengths of dia-
logues and different types of contextual information that different AI models might
require. For instance, some models might need additional metadata about user emo-
tions or interaction patterns, which can be readily added to the document structure
without affecting existing data or requiring schema migrations.
4.4 Large Language Model Implementation
The large language model layer leverages the University’s GPU-enabled OMNI clus-
ter [35] for efficient model inference. The implementation utilizes Ollama [36], an
open-source tool that simplifies running and serving large language models. When
Ollama is launched on the cluster using the ollama serve command, it creates an
API endpoint that can serve any LLM model available on the GPU nodes.
4.4.1 Running Ollama on OMNI Cluster
Running Ollama on the OMNI cluster requires careful consideration of the cluster’s
architecture and policies. The cluster operates on a Slurm scheduling system for
GPU access, and it’s recommended to use the workspace directory (/work) rather
than the home directory for compute jobs. Workspaces offer unlimited storage and
faster connections to compute nodes, though they are temporary with a maximum
duration of 30 days (extendable up to three times).
The implementation began with creating a workspace and downloading the Ollama
binary in the /work/ws-tmp/<workspace_name> directory.
To run Ollama on the GPU nodes, a Slurm job scheduling script was created. This
is shown in the listing 4.1.
1 #!/bin/bash
2 #SBATCH --job-name=ollama-server
3 #SBATCH --output=logs/output_%j.txt
4 #SBATCH --error=logs/error_%j.txt
5 #SBATCH --time=06:00:00
6 #SBATCH --nodes=1
7 #SBATCH --ntasks=1
8 #SBATCH --cpus-per-task=32
9 #SBATCH --mem=256G
10 #SBATCH --partition=gpu
11 #SBATCH --exclusive
12
13 cd /work/ws-tmp/<workspace_name>/
14 ./bin/ollama serve
15
16 wait
Listing 4.1: Slurm job scheduling script (run_ollama.sh)
30

--- PAGE 41 ---
Implementation
This script configures several important parameters:
• Allocates a full node with 32 CPU cores and 256GB of memory
• Requests GPU Node resources through the gpu partition
• Sets a runtime limit of 6 hours
• Directs output and error logs to separate files in a logs directory
• Uses –-exclusive to ensure dedicated node access
The job can be submitted to the Slurm scheduler using:
sbatch run_ollama.sh
Once scheduled, Slurm assigns the job to an available GPU node, where Ollama can
serve models through its API endpoint. The job’s status and assigned node can be
monitored using standard Slurm commands such as squeue.
4.4.2 Model Management
Once the Ollama server is running on the GPU node, models need to be pulled
before they can be used through the API. Models can be added using the ollama
pull command followed by the model name:
ollama pull llama3.2:latest # pull the latest version
ollama pull gemma2:9b
# pull the specific version
Only models that have been explicitly pulled are available for use through the Ollama
API endpoints. The models can be pulled from the official Ollama model library,
which provides a wide range of open-source language models optimized for different
use cases. After pulling, these models become persistently available on the node for
API requests until they are explicitly removed.
To verify which models are currently available on the server, ollama list command
can be used.
This command displays all pulled models along with their respective sizes and last
modified dates, helping administrators track and manage the available models on the
GPU node. The study utilized several open-source language models of varying sizes
to evaluate performance across different use cases. Table 4.3 provides an overview
of the key models deployed in this research.
4.4.3 Accessing Ollama
To enable secure access to the Ollama server running on the GPU cluster from
the local development environment, a two-step SSH port forwarding configuration
is implemented. First, a tunnel is established from the cluster’s login node to the
31

--- PAGE 42 ---
Implementation
Model Name
Version
Developer/
Organization
Parameter
Size
Size
llama
3.2
Meta
3.21B
2 GB
gemma
2.0
Google
9.24B
5.4 GB
Phi
3.5
Microsoft
3.82B
2.2 GB
nemotron-mini
1
NVIDIA
4.19B
2.7 GB
qwen
2.5
AliBaba
7.62B
4.7 GB
Table 4.3: Language Models Used in the Study
specific GPU node where Ollama is running. Then, a second tunnel is created from
the local machine to the login node. This creates a secure pathway for API requests
to reach the Ollama server.
The bash script shown in listing 4.2 automates this port forwarding setup.
1
% #!/bin/bash
2
if [[ -z "$1" ]]; then
3
echo "Usage: forward <scheduled_node_name>"
4
echo "e.g., forward gpu-node001"
5
exit 1
6
fi
7
8
ssh omni -f "ssh -L 11434:localhost:11434 $1 -Nf"
9
ssh -L 8000:localhost:11434 omni -Nf
Listing 4.2: Bash script for forwarding local port to OMNI Cluster’s GPU Node
The script takes the GPU node name as an argument and establishes the required
SSH tunnels. The first ssh command forwards port 11434 from the GPU node to the
login node, while the second command forwards port 8000 on the local machine to
port 11434 on the login node. This creates a secure chain that allows the application
to interact with the Ollama API as if it were running locally, while actually utilizing
the powerful GPU resources available on the cluster. This script simplifies accessing
the model running on the GPU node to a single terminal command:
./forward gpu-node001
The script can also be made globally accessible by adding it to the system PATH,
typically by moving it to /usr/local/bin/ or adding its directory to the PATH
environment variable.
4.5 User Interaction Process
The figure 4.1 shows the interaction process between the end-user and the social
robot, emphasizing how the system processes user inputs, both text and voice, and
32

--- PAGE 43 ---
Implementation
responds back to the user. The flow integrates various technologies like speech recog-
nition, text-to-speech conversion, and a Large Language Model (LLM) to deliver a
seamless user experience.
Figure 4.1: This figure illustrates the user interaction process with the social robot,
highlighting the flow of communication and the integration of various
technologies for seamless interaction.
The end-user and the social robot are intended to engage in a natural, multimodal,
and captivating way. Users can interact with the robot either through text or voice
input. Additionally, the robot supports a proactive mode, which allows it to take
the initiative and respond autonomously to the user.
When the robot operates in proactive mode, the browser’s speech recognition is
enabled and listens for the wake phrase “Hey bot”. Once the phrase is detected,
the robot becomes active and starts listening for additional user input. Until no
speech is detected or the wake phrase is absent, the speech recognition engine keeps
listening. This proactive listening capability makes the interaction seamless and
dynamic, as users can engage with the robot hands-free, without explicitly pressing
buttons or typing commands.
For non-proactive interactions, the system identifies the input type provided by the
user. If the input is text, the user’s message is forwarded directly to the robot’s
backend, where the Large Language Model (LLM) processes it to generate a re-
sponse. If the input is voice, the system uses the Google Speech-to-Text API to
convert the spoken words into text.
The converted, in case of voice input, or directly provided text along with the user’s
health data is sent to the LLM for analysis and response generation. The LLM
uses its advanced capabilities to provide context-aware and personalized responses
based on the user’s query. After processing the input, the robot generates an audio
response using the Google Text-to-Speech API. This ensures that the robot commu-
nicates verbally with users in a natural and conversational manner, creating a more
human-like interaction.
33

--- PAGE 44 ---
Implementation
Additionally, a control panel interface, as shown in figure 3.2, provides a way to
configure the robot’s parameters. For example, administrators can enable proactive
mode, change LLM model, language, and voice gender. This control panel ensures
flexibility and adaptability, making it easier to optimize the robot’s performance.
In conclusion, the interaction flow combines voice, text, and voice command commu-
nication, and advanced language modeling to create a sophisticated user experience.
In proactive mode, the system leverages browser-based speech recognition as well
as Google’s APIs to ensure smooth, efficient, and meaningful interactions with the
end-user. To evaluate which of these communication modes suits for interactive
health coaching, a survey was conducted, and the details of the study are presented
in Chapter 5.
The source code for the implementation of the social robot, including the frontend
and backend components, is available on GitHub1.
This repository contains all
necessary files, documentation, and instructions for setting up the project locally.
1https://github.com/atikkhannilgar/Social_Robot
34

--- PAGE 45 ---
5 User Study
In this chapter, the study conducted to evaluate the effectiveness of different com-
munication modes for the social robotic avatar is presented. The primary objective
of the study was to compare different communication modes, and determine which
one provides the best user experience.
5.1 Study Setup
Text input, voice input via button, and voice commands by wake word were the three
communication modes used in the study to assess the user experience of interacting
with the social robot avatar. The setup involved creating a controlled environment
where participants could observe the robot’s interactions in each mode through pre-
recorded videos. This approach ensured consistency in the robot’s responses and
allowed for a fair comparison of the different communication modes.
The study setup included the following steps:
1. Response generation: For the videos, responses were generated once by the
large language model (LLM) and consistently applied across all three videos.
2. Video recording: Videos were captured showing the robot interacting with
users using each of the three communication modes: text input, voice input
via button, and voice commands via wake word.
3. Survey creation: To assess the user experience of engaging with the robot, a
User Experience Questionnaire (UEQ) was developed. The survey was anony-
mous and hosted on the University’s LimeSurvey Portal1 [37].
4. Survey execution: Participants viewed the videos and evaluated their expe-
rience using the questionnaire.
5. Response collection: The survey was conducted anonymously, resulting in
32 complete responses.
6. Data analysis: The gathered data was analyzed to identify which communi-
cation mode received the highest ratings across various attributes.
5.2 Procedure
The study involved three questions, and the same set of responses was used in each
mode to maintain uniformity. The videos were then shown to participants, who were
1https://umfragen.uni-siegen.de/
35

--- PAGE 46 ---
User Study
asked to evaluate their experience using a User Experience Questionnaire (UEQ).
The UEQ was conducted on the University’s LimeSurvey Portal and included the
following 13 attributes:
1. Annoying / Enjoyable
2. Dull / Creative
3. Boring / Exciting
4. Not Interesting / Interesting
5. Slow / Fast
6. Conventional / Inventive
7. Complicated / Easy
8. Unpleasant / Pleasant
9. Not Secure / Secure
10. Does Not Meet Expectations / Meets Expectations
11. Inefficient / Efficient
12. Confusing / Clear
13. Impractical / Practical
Each attribute was rated on a scale from 1 to 7, allowing participants to express their
level of rating with each statement. The survey was distributed to a diverse pool
of potential participants to ensure a wide range of responses. To further enhance
the reliability of the results, the videos were presented to participants in a random
order. Similarly, the attributes for each question were also randomized to minimize
any potential bias that could arise from the order of presentation. An important
factor in encouraging respondents to give honest, unbiased feedback without wor-
rying about judgment was the survey’s anonymity. Participants were instructed to
watch the videos carefully and then evaluate their experience using the provided
attributes. Additionally, the names of communication modes were not disclosed to
the participants, to avoid any potential bias that could arise from the names of the
communication modes.
To learn more about the participants’ backgrounds, a collection of demographic in-
formation was gathered at the end of the survey. This demographic section included
questions about the participant’s gender and age, providing a basic understanding
of the demographic distribution of the respondents. Furthermore, participants were
asked whether they owned an activity tracker, such as a Fitbit or Apple Watch.
For those who confirmed ownership, an additional question was posed regarding the
frequency of their activity tracker usage, ranging from daily use to occasional or
rare use. Additionally, the survey explored the participants’ previous experience
with voice assistants, such as Alexa, Google Assistant, or Siri. This question aimed
to gauge their level of interaction and comfort with voice-activated technologies.
The demographic data was not associated with the responses and was analyzed
separately.
36

--- PAGE 47 ---
User Study
The detailed results and analysis of this study, including the comparative perfor-
mance of different communication modes and key insights derived from the user
responses, are presented in Chapter 6.
37

--- PAGE 48 ---

--- PAGE 49 ---
6 Evaluation
The findings and analysis of the user study that was carried out to assess the effec-
tiveness of various communication modes in the social robotic avatar are presented
in this chapter. The analysis focuses on comparing the user experience across text
input, voice input, and voice command modes.
6.1 Study Results Overview
Overall, 55 responses were received, but only 32 were complete. Among these, 6
responses were marked with the same values for all attributes, such as all 7s in a
row for all three modes. These responses were discarded, resulting in a final dataset
of 26 entries used for analysis. The demographic distribution of the participants is
shown in Figure 6.1. The majority of participants were in the age group of 25-34
years (71.9%), followed by 18-24 years (25%). The gender distribution shows a higher
participation from males (68.8%) compared to females (31.2%). Important insights
into the user experience for each communication mode were obtained from the survey
results. The results were analyzed to determine which mode was rated highest across
the various attributes, helping to identify the most effective communication mode
for the social robotic avatar.
(a) Age Distribution
(b) Gender Distribution
Figure 6.1: Demographic distribution of study participants showing age groups
and gender ratios.
39

--- PAGE 50 ---
Evaluation
6.2 Communication Mode-Level Analysis
This box plot shown in Figure 6.2 visualizes the distribution of User Experience
Questionnaire (UEQ) scores across the three communication modes: Text Mode,
Voice Mode, and Voice Command Mode. The scores for each mode were calculated
by taking the mean score across all 13 UEQ attributes for each user response. This
plot helps in understanding the central tendency, variability, and spread of user
evaluations for each communication mode.
Figure 6.2: Results of the study, illustrating the comparative performance of dif-
ferent communication modes based on user experience attributes, high-
lighting key insights into user preferences and satisfaction levels.
The x-axis represents the communication modes, while the y-axis shows the mean
scores, which range from 1 (least favorable) to 7 (most favorable). Each score is
calculated by averaging a user’s ratings across 13 UEQ attributes.
For Text Mode, the box plot reveals a median score of approximately 5.3, with a
relatively wide interquartile range (IQR), indicating greater variability in user expe-
riences. The whiskers extend down to 2, suggesting that some users rated this mode
quite low, highlighting its mixed reception. In comparison, both Voice Mode and
Voice Command Mode exhibit higher median scores, close to 6, indicating a gen-
erally more favorable evaluation. Voice Mode shows the narrowest IQR among the
three modes, reflecting more consistent feedback from users. The whiskers for both
Voice and Voice Command Modes extend to minimum scores closer to 4, signifying
that most users rated these modes more positively than Text Mode.
6.2.1 Key Observations
The table 6.1 provides a statistical summary of the communication modes, includ-
ing median scores, interquartile range (IQR), minimum and maximum scores, and
standard deviation (Std. Dev.).
40

--- PAGE 51 ---
Evaluation
Mode
Median Score
IQR
Min Score
Max Score
Std. Dev.
Text
5.31
2.02
2.54
7
1.26
Voice
5.54
1.33
4.10
7
0.90
Voice Command
5.46
1.65
4.23
7
0.91
Table 6.1: Statistical Summary of Communication Modes
1. Median Scores:
• The median for Text Mode is 5.31, indicating a moderate level of satis-
faction.
• For Voice Mode, the median is slightly higher (around 5.54), suggesting
that users found it more favorable on average.
• The Voice Command Mode also has a median near 5.46, showing a similar
level of favorability to Voice Mode.
2. Interquartile Range (IQR) Variability:
• The IQR for Text Mode is wider than for the other two modes, indicating
greater variability in user responses. This suggests that user opinions
about Text Mode were more diverse.
• The Voice Command Mode has a slightly narrower IQR, implying more
consistent evaluations.
• The Voice Mode has the narrowest IQR, showing that user evaluations
were relatively uniform.
3. Range of Scores (Whisker Lengths):
• Text Mode has the widest range, with some scores as low as 2, suggesting
that some users had negative experiences with this mode.
• Both Voice Mode and Voice Command Mode have a smaller range, with
minimum scores closer to 4, indicating that most users rated these modes
more favorably.
4. Overall:
• The mean scores (not explicitly shown in but inferred from the median
and IQR) suggest that Voice Mode and Voice Command Mode are per-
ceived more favorably than Text Mode.
• The narrower spread of scores for Voice Command Mode indicates that
it might be the most reliable option for delivering a consistent user expe-
rience.
• The standard deviation values further support these findings, with Text
Mode showing the highest variability (SD = 1.26) compared to Voice
Mode (SD = 0.90) and Voice Command Mode (SD = 0.91).
41

--- PAGE 52 ---

--- PAGE 53 ---
7 Discussion
This chapter discusses the implications of the evaluation results and their significance
for the development of social robotic avatars in health coaching applications.
7.1 Interpretation of Results
The evaluation results reveal several important insights about user preferences and
interaction patterns with the social robotic avatar. The clear preference for voice-
based communication modes (both Voice Mode and Voice Command Mode) over
Text Mode suggests that users value natural and intuitive interaction methods.
This aligns with the broader trend in human-robot interaction where more natural
interfaces are generally preferred.
7.2 Implications for Social Robot Design
The findings have several implications for the design of social robotic avatars:
1. Voice Interface Priority: The strong performance of voice-based modes
suggests that future developments should prioritize robust voice interaction
capabilities.
2. Multimodal Flexibility: While voice modes were preferred, the acceptable
performance of text mode indicates value in maintaining multiple interaction
options to accommodate different user preferences and situations.
3. Consistency in Voice Interactions: The narrower IQR in voice modes
suggests that these interfaces provided a more consistently positive experience,
highlighting the importance of reliable voice processing.
4. User Experience Factors: The high ratings for attributes like efficiency and
clarity in voice modes indicate that users value interaction methods that feel
natural and require minimal cognitive load.
7.3 Privacy Considerations
Privacy considerations play a crucial role in the development of social robotic avatars,
particularly in sensitive domains like health coaching. In this system, privacy is fun-
damentally architected through strategic technological choices. By utilizing Ollama
43

--- PAGE 54 ---
Discussion
for local large language model processing on a custom GPU, the system ensures
complete data sovereignty and eliminates external data transmission risks. This ap-
proach provides granular control over computational processes, allowing all sensitive
language understanding and generation to occur within a secure, isolated environ-
ment.
While the system leverages Google’s text-to-speech and speech-to-text services, these
technologies are commonly employed across contemporary research and commer-
cial applications. Although third-party speech services might initially raise data
handling questions, Google’s established privacy frameworks and comprehensive
anonymization protocols mitigate these potential risks. Numerous prior research
studies have similarly utilized these cloud-based speech technologies, establishing a
precedent of responsible data management.
The moderate security ratings, averaging around 5.5 (on a scale of 1 to 7) across
different communication modes, suggest a balanced approach to privacy-preserving
design strategies. The privacy considerations were addressed during the develop-
ment process of the system. This highlights the ongoing challenge of ensuring user
data protection in interactive robotic systems while navigating the complexities of
technological innovation.
7.4 Limitations
Several limitations of the current study should be acknowledged:
1. Sample Size: With 26 valid responses, while sufficient for initial insights, a
larger sample size would provide more robust conclusions.
2. Laboratory Setting: The evaluation was conducted using pre-recorded videos
rather than real-time interactions, which might not fully capture the nuances
of actual user experiences.
3. Short-term Evaluation: The study focused on initial user impressions rather
than long-term interaction patterns and user adaptation over time.
4. Limited Demographics: The participant pool might not fully represent all
potential user groups for health coaching applications.
5. Round Trip Time Limitations: The architecture of the system introduces
limitations related to round trip time, which can affect the responsiveness of
interactions and overall user experience.
6. Google APIs Privacy Concerns: While utilizing Google’s services can
enhance functionality, it raises privacy concerns regarding data handling and
user information, necessitating careful consideration of how data is managed
and protected.
44

--- PAGE 55 ---
Discussion
7.5 Future Work
The study’s findings and limitations offer a number of exciting avenues for more
research and development. From a technical perspective, the system could bene-
fit from several enhancements to its core capabilities. Advanced voice processing
improvements could include more sophisticated wake word detection with lower
false activation rates, enhanced noise cancellation for better recognition in noisy
environments, and support for multiple languages and accents. The LLM integra-
tion could be strengthened through fine-tuning approaches specifically tailored for
health-related dialogue, implementing more sophisticated context management for
extended conversations, and investigating methods to reduce response latency while
maintaining quality. Notably, processing voice in real time instead of waiting for the
user to finish could significantly improve round trip time and thus reduce latency of
responses. The user interface could evolve to include more expressive avatar anima-
tions, gesture recognition capabilities, and adaptive interface elements that respond
to user preferences.
Privacy and security considerations remain paramount for future development. En-
hanced data protection measures should include implementing end-to-end encryp-
tion for all communications, developing more granular user control over data sharing,
and adding secure multi-user support with role-based access control. The explo-
ration of privacy-preserving AI techniques, such as federated learning approaches
for model improvement and differential privacy techniques for data aggregation,
could further strengthen the system’s privacy guarantees while enabling continuous
improvement of the underlying models.
Future evaluation efforts should address the current study’s limitations through
more comprehensive research approaches. Longitudinal studies would be valuable
to evaluate sustained user engagement, assess the effectiveness of health coaching
over extended periods, and study user adaptation patterns. Broader user studies
incorporating diverse demographic groups and different cultural contexts would pro-
vide insights into the system’s effectiveness across various populations. Real-world
deployment testing in actual healthcare settings would be crucial to evaluate inte-
gration capabilities with existing health monitoring systems and assess scalability
requirements.
The health coaching capabilities of the system could be significantly expanded in
future iterations. Enhanced monitoring capabilities could include integration with
additional health monitoring devices, real-time health data analysis, and the devel-
opment of predictive health insights. Personalization could be improved through
more sophisticated user profiling, adaptive coaching strategies, and personalized
motivation techniques. Healthcare integration could be strengthened by develop-
ing interfaces with healthcare providers, implementing standardized health data
exchange protocols, and creating professional monitoring dashboards for healthcare
practitioners.
45

--- PAGE 56 ---

--- PAGE 57 ---
8 Conclusion
The creation and assessment of a proactive social robotic avatar for health and
well-being coaching was presented in this thesis. The system successfully demon-
strated how to combine multimodal interaction capabilities with massive language
models. The study aided in the creation of an architecture that uses local process-
ing to enable efficient health data handling. The implementation of multimodal
interaction capabilities, featuring text, voice input, and voice commands, alongside
a web-based interface, can provide users with flexible and natural ways to inter-
act with the system. The successful integration of large language models enabled
natural conversations with context awareness.
The evaluation results revealed important insights about the system’s effectiveness
and user preferences. Voice-based interaction modes consistently emerged as the
preferred method of communication, outperforming text-based interaction in user
satisfaction scores. The web-based implementation proved to be an effective choice,
offering accessibility and enhancing user experience. The integration of LLMs suc-
cessfully provided natural and context-aware responses, contributing to positive user
experiences across all communication modes.
This research demonstrates that it is possible to create social robotic avatars that
effectively support health and well-being coaching. While the study identified areas
for improvement and expansion, it provides a solid foundation for future develop-
ments in social robotics for healthcare applications. More advanced health coaching
systems may be developed using the knowledge gathered from this research, which
will ultimately improve health outcomes. The positive reception of the system, par-
ticularly its voice-based interactions, suggests a promising future for social robotic
avatars in healthcare applications.
47

--- PAGE 58 ---

--- PAGE 59 ---
Bibliography
[1]
Cynthia Breazeal et al. “Social Robotics”. In: Springer Handbook of Robotics.
Ed. by Bruno Siciliano; Oussama Khatib. Cham: Springer International Pub-
lishing, 2016, pp. 1935–1972. isbn: 978-3-319-32552-1. doi: 10.1007/978-3-
319-32552-1_72. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-32552-
1_72.
[2]
Moojan Ghafurian et al. “Systematic Review of Social Robots for Health and
Wellbeing: A Personal Healthcare Journey Lens”. In: J. Hum.-Robot Interact.
14 (2024), 1.
[3]
Rene Novak “The Rise of the ‘Immersive Virtual Online Avatar Society’: Does
an Online Community Established in the Virtual Space Constitute a ‘Real’
Society?: Visual Technologies as a Panacea for Social Isolation”. In: Video
Journal of Education and Pedagogy 6 (2022), 1, pp. 1 –19.
[4]
Elizabeth Day Brigitte Viljoen. Social robot or digital avatar? Users interact
with this AI technology as if it’s real. https://theconversation.com/s
ocial- robot- or- digital- avatar- users- interact- with- this- ai-
technology-as-if-its-real-229798. Accessed: 2024-07-30.
[5]
Yeseung Kim et al. “A survey on integration of large language models with
intelligent robots”. In: Intelligent Service Robotics 17 (2024), 5, pp. 1091–
1107.
[6]
Zhiyong Lu et al. “Large language models in biomedicine and health: current
research landscape and future directions”. In: Journal of the American Medical
Informatics Association 31 (2024), 9, pp. 1801–1811All authors declare no
conflict of interests.
[7]
MIT Media Lab. Wearable Device-assisted Emotional Wellbeing Intervention
with a Social Robot. https://www.media.mit.edu/projects/wearable/
overview/. Accessed: 2024-07-14.
[8]
Yoon Kyung Lee et al. Developing Social Robots with Empathetic Non-Verbal
Cues Using Large Language Models. 2023. arXiv: 2308.16529 [cs.RO]. url:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.16529.
49

--- PAGE 60 ---
Bibliography
[9]
LuxAI. A complete guide to build a Conversational Social Robot with QTrobot
and ChatGPT. Accessed: 2024-06-12. url: https://luxai.com/blog/compl
ete-guide-to-build-conversational-social-robot-qtrobot-chatgpt/.
[10]
HIPAA Journal. Patients Holding Back Health Information Over Data Privacy
Fears. https://www.hipaajournal.com/patients-holding-back-health-
information-over-fears-of-data-privacy-8634/. Accessed: 2024-07-14.
2017.
[11]
HIMSS Global Health Conference & Exhibition. Inclusive Design in Healthcare
Means Developing Empathy and Understanding. https://gkc.himss.org/
resources/inclusive-design-healthcare-means-developing-empathy-
and-understanding. Accessed: 2024-07-14. 2021.
[12]
PDHI. Enhancing Accessibility in Digital Health Solutions. https://www.pdh
i.com/healthcare-technology/enhancing-accessibility-in-digital-
health-solutions. Accessed: 2024-07-30. 2017.
[13]
Julián Caro Linares. awesome-social-robots. https://github.com/jcarolin
ares/awesome-social-robots. Accessed: 2024-06-14. GitHub, Apr. 2022.
[14]
User Experience Questionnaire. User Experience Questionnaire (UEQ). http
s://www.ueq-online.org/. Accessed: 2024-12-10.
[15]
Nazish Khalid et al. “Privacy-preserving artificial intelligence in healthcare:
Techniques and applications”. In: Computers in Biology and Medicine 158
(2023). P. 106848.
[16]
Atikkhan Faridkhan Nilgar et al. Users’ Perception on Appropriateness of Robotic
Coaching Assistant’s Disclosure Behaviors. 2024. arXiv: 2410.10550 [cs.HC].
url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.10550.
[17]
Eleni Vrochidou et al. “DESIGN OF SOCIAL ROBOTS USING OPEN-SOURCE
ROBOTIC PLATFORMS”. In: Sept. 2018.
[18]
Tife Sanusi. AI Robots are Here: Integrating LLMs with Robotic Architecture.
https://deepgram.com/learn/integrating-llms-with-robotic-archit
ecture. Accessed: 2024-12-21. Jan. 2024.
[19]
Adriana Tapus et al. The Grand Challenges in Socially Assistive Robotics. ht
tps://hal.science/hal-00770113/document. Accessed: 2024-07-30. 2013.
[20]
Furhat Robotics. Furhat Robotics. https : / / www . furhatrobotics . com/.
Accessed: 2024-06-14.
50

--- PAGE 61 ---
Bibliography
[21]
Patricia Alves-Oliveira et al. “FLEX-SDK: An Open-Source Software Develop-
ment Kit for Creating Social Robots”. In: Proceedings of the 35th Annual ACM
Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology. UIST ’22. Bend, OR,
USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2022. isbn: 9781450393201. doi:
10.1145/3526113.3545707. url: https://doi.org/10.1145/3526113.
3545707.
[22]
Bingjie Liu; S. Shyam Sundar “Should Machines Express Sympathy and Em-
pathy? Experiments with a Health Advice Chatbot”. In: Cyberpsychology, Be-
havior, and Social Networking 21 (2018), 10, pp. 625–636PMID: 30334655.
[23]
LuxAI. Robotic Coaches Delivering Group Mindfulness Practice. Accessed:
2024-06-12. url: https://luxai.com/project/robotic- coaches- deli
vering-group-mindfulness-practice/.
[24]
Meta Platforms Inc. React - A JavaScript library for building user interfaces.
https://react.dev. Accessed: 2024-07-25. 2013.
[25]
MDN Web Docs. MediaRecorder API. Accessed: 2024-07-14. url: https://
developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/MediaRecorder.
[26]
MDN Web Docs. SpeechRecognition API. Accessed: 2024-07-14. url: https:
//developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/SpeechRecognition.
[27]
Dan Abramov; Andrew Clark. Redux. https://redux.js.org. Accessed:
2024-07-25. 2015.
[28]
MDN Web Docs. The WebSocket API (WebSockets). Accessed: 2024-07-14.
url: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/WebSockets
_API.
[29]
Sebastián Ramírez. FastAPI - Modern, Fast (High-Performance) Web Frame-
work for building APIs with Python. https://fastapi.tiangolo.com/.
Accessed: 2024-07-25. 2018.
[30]
Sébastien Eustace. Poetry - Python packaging and dependency management
made easy. https://python-poetry.org. Accessed: 2024-07-25. 2018.
[31]
Tom Christie; the Uvicorn contributors. Uvicorn - The lightning-fast ASGI
server implementation, using UVloop and httptools. https://www.uvicorn.
org. Accessed: 2024-07-25. 2018.
[32]
Samuel Colvin. Pydantic - Data validation and settings management using
Python type annotations. https://pydantic.dev/. Accessed: 2024-07-25.
2017.
51

--- PAGE 62 ---
Bibliography
[33]
MongoDB Inc. PyMongo - Python Driver for MongoDB. https://pymongo.
readthedocs.io. Accessed: 2024-10-19. 2009.
[34]
Daniel Shawcross Wilkerson. A Proposal for Proquints: Identifiers that are
Readable, Spellable, and Pronounceable. Accessed: 2024-10-19. 2009. url: htt
ps://arxiv.org/html/0901.4016.
[35]
University of Siegen. High-Performance Computing Cluster Information. url:
https://cluster.uni-siegen.de/omni/system-information/?lang=en.
[36]
Ollama Inc. Ollama - Get up and running with large language models. https:
//ollama.com. Accessed: 2024-07-30. 2023.
[37]
University of Siegen. LimeSurvey Portal. url: https : / / umfragen . uni -
siegen.de/.
52

--- PAGE 63 ---
Appendix
User Experience Questionnaire (UEQ)
The User Experience Questionnaire (UEQ) used in this study included the following
13 attributes to evaluate the user experience of interacting with the robot:
Annoying
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Enjoyable
Dull
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Creative
Boring
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Exciting
Not Interesting
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Interesting
Slow
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Fast
Conventional
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Inventive
Complicated
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Easy
Unpleasant
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Pleasant
Not Secure
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Secure
Does Not Meet Expectations
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Meets Expectations
Inefficient
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Efficient
Confusing
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Clear
Impractical
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Practical
53

