CE-FedAvg: A Communication-Efficient Federated
Learning Framework for LoRaWAN-Based Edge AI
Seyedmohammadamin Razaghi
Faculty of Computer Science
University of Vienna
Vienna, Austria
Atakan Aral
Faculty of Computer Science
University of Vienna
Vienna, Austria
Abstract—Federated
Learning
(FL)
enables
collaborative
model
training
without
centralizing
data,
yet
deployment
over low-power wide-area networks (LPWANs), such as Lo-
RaWAN, remains challenging due to severe bandwidth, pay-
load, and duty-cycle constraints. This work examines the fea-
sibility of FL on LoRaWAN by designing and implementing
a communication-efficient framework tailored to constrained
Internet of Things (IoT) environments. CE-FedAvg is intro-
duced as a communication-efficient variant of FedAvg that
restructures client–server exchanges to comply with standard
LoRaWAN operation. In addition to sparsification, quantization,
and lightweight compression, CE-FedAvg incorporates seed-based
initialization for deterministic synchronization and explores model
improvements optimized for ultra-low-throughput communication
environments. The framework is fully compatible with the
LoRaWAN specification and is implemented across heterogeneous
edge devices and a low-power gateway, demonstrating end-to-end
feasibility under realistic IoT conditions.
Index Terms—Federated Learning, LoRaWAN, Edge AI, Com-
munication Efficiency, Sparsification, Quantization
I. INTRODUCTION
The rise of the Internet of Things (IoT) and edge computing
has spurred interest in Federated Learning (FL) as a means
to train models collaboratively on distributed devices without
centralizing data [1], [2]. By keeping data on devices and
exchanging only model updates, FL can preserve privacy
and reduce backhaul traffic. In many IoT deployments, long-
range, battery-powered sensing relies on low-power wide-area
networks (LPWANs) such as LoRaWAN for smart meter-
ing, agriculture, and industrial condition monitoring [3]. In
these settings, FL is attractive because it enables on-device
adaptation to local drift while keeping raw data on premises,
which reduces uplink volume and recurring connectivity cost,
supports privacy/regulatory compliance (e.g., GDPR [4]), and
works where only LPWAN coverage exists. LoRaWAN is
widely deployed, energy-efficient, and uses unlicensed spec-
trum. Enabling FL over LoRaWAN would enable large fleets to
learn in place without requiring broadband backhaul. However,
deploying FL in LoRaWAN introduces strict bandwidth and
duty-cycle limitations that can impede model convergence and
overall training reliability, particularly when traditional FL
protocols are directly applied over LoRaWAN links.
This research was funded in part by CHIST-ERA-22-SPiDDS-07 (TROCI
Project), Austrian Science Fund (FWF).
Most existing FL research assumes high-bandwidth and
low-latency communication channels, where frequent model
synchronization and full-precision parameter exchange are
feasible. In contrast, LoRaWAN offers only a few hundred
bits per second of uplink bandwidth, with strict 1% duty-
cycle limitations and long inter-packet intervals. Moreover,
the downlink channel is even more constrained, often oper-
ating under asynchronous ALOHA-based access with limited
acknowledgments. Consequently, communication strategies in
LoRaWAN-based FL must be carefully redesigned to ensure
protocol compliance while minimizing resource consumption.
Recent studies have begun to explore FL over LPWAN
scenarios. For instance, Singh and Borkotoky [5] develop a de-
tailed FL-over-LoRa simulator, highlighting that LoRaWAN’s
low data rate and strict duty-cycling can drastically slow
down FL training unless communication-efficient techniques
are applied. Torres et al. [6] demonstrate a federated anomaly
detection system for industrial IoT using LoRaWAN, achiev-
ing accuracy comparable to a centralized model but requiring
careful scheduling of rounds and incurring substantial training-
message airtime in their setting. Their work underscores the
need to adapt the FL paradigm to LoRaWAN’s limitations.
Likewise, in a LoRa mesh network, Gim´enez et al. [7]
implemented embedded FL on microcontroller-based sensors
and confirmed the feasibility of distributed training at the tiny
edge, although network throughput remained a bottleneck.
This
work
introduces
CE-FedAvg,
a
communication-
efficient approach that operates fully within the LoRaWAN
standard without modifying MAC or PHY layers. In contrast
to approaches that propose new network-layer adaptations
or scheduling protocols, CE-FedAvg focuses on optimizing
the FL communication pattern itself by combining update
sparsification, model quantization, and lightweight compres-
sion to reduce uplink payload sizes by up to an order of
magnitude while maintaining model convergence. CE-FedAvg
further incorporates a seed-based initialization mechanism
that ensures deterministic synchronization among participating
clients, leading to improved reproducibility and stable con-
vergence even under heterogeneous edge conditions. Comple-
mentary model improvements, such as lightweight convolu-
tional architectures optimized for constrained devices, reduce
computational demand and update size. These techniques
collectively enable FL to operate efficiently on real LoRaWAN
infrastructure without requiring protocol-level modifications.
The remainder of the paper reviews related work, defines the
problem, introduces CE-FedAvg, outlines implementation and
evaluation, and concludes with a discussion of future work.
II. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
A. Federated Learning and Communication Efficiency
The classical FedAvg algorithm [1] and large-scale imple-
mentations [8] established the feasibility of training shared
models without centralizing data. Communication quickly
emerges as a dominant bottleneck in FL, particularly under
limited client bandwidth. To address this, prior work has pro-
posed gradient sparsification [9], quantization [10], and update
compression [11] to reduce transmitted payloads with limited
accuracy loss, providing a foundation for operation in low-
capacity networks. However, most communication-efficient
methods assume broadband or cellular links. LPWANs such
as LoRaWAN differ substantially: they offer extremely low
data rates, long inter-packet intervals, and strict duty-cycle
limits. In addition, ALOHA-based random access introduces
uncertainty due to collisions and constrained acknowledgment
windows [12]. Consequently, FL algorithms designed for Wi-
Fi or LTE cannot be directly applied to LoRaWAN without
violating compliance or energy budgets.
B. FL in LPWAN and LoRaWAN Contexts
Recent studies have explored federated learning in con-
strained IoT and LPWAN scenarios. Chen et al. [13] examine
communication- and resource-optimized FL over wireless IoT
networks, but their design assumes relatively high-throughput
links compared with LPWANs. Nguyen et al. [14] survey FL
techniques for IoT and emphasize communication efficiency
and device heterogeneity as central challenges in low-power
environments. Kaur and Jadhav [15] review FL approaches
under resource constraints and identify the lack of practical
implementations targeting ultra-narrowband systems such as
LoRaWAN. LoRaWAN behavior has been extensively char-
acterized in terms of airtime, capacity, and collision dynam-
ics [16]. Simulation tools, such as LoRaSim [17], enable
analysis of large-scale deployments, modeling capture effects
and channel diversity. These analyses underline the importance
of minimizing transmission airtime, which is the motivation
behind CE-FedAvg’s compressed communication design.
C. Seed-Based Initialization and Model Adaptation
Reproducibility and synchronization are key challenges in
the initial round of federated settings with intermittent con-
nectivity. Our framework introduces seed-based initialization,
where clients share a global pseudorandom seed to initial-
ize model weights deterministically. This approach improves
cross-client consistency without increasing communication
load. Similar ideas have been explored in adaptive FL litera-
ture [18], [19], [20], but CE-FedAvg applies them specifically
to LoRaWAN’s constrained communication regime. Architec-
tural adaptation complements communication-side optimiza-
tions. Lightweight convolutional designs with reduced channel
widths, batch normalization, and optional depthwise separable
layers can reduce training latency and update size with limited
accuracy impact on tasks such as FEMNIST [21]. Such
model-level choices provide gains comparable to protocol-
level compression and highlight the value of jointly consid-
ering architecture and communication budgets.
D. Summary and Research Gap
Existing FL frameworks frequently rely on cross-layer co-
ordination or dynamic MAC control that is incompatible with
standard LoRaWAN operation. For example, Yang et al. [18]
optimize communication–computation trade-offs in wireless
networks, while Jin et al. [19] balance update frequency
and bandwidth to reduce power consumption; da Silva et
al. [20] study energy-aware user sampling under multichan-
nel ALOHA. Although these approaches effectively reduce
energy consumption in broadband or cellular environments,
they assume adaptive link-layer control and abundant downlink
bandwidth. Such assumptions are not valid for LPWANs
like LoRaWAN, where payload size, transmission interval,
and duty-cycle are strictly limited by regulation. In con-
trast, our focus in this work is purely on the application
layer, where communication efficiency and synchronization
are achieved through sparsification, quantization, and seed-
based initialization, without modifying the LoRaWAN MAC.
This compliance-oriented design addresses a gap between
theoretical proposals and deployable systems by enabling
immediate operation over existing LoRaWAN infrastructure.
III. PROBLEM FORMULATION AND RESOURCE MODEL
A. FL Objective
Consider clients i ∈{1, . . . , N} with local data distribu-
tions Di and objectives Fi(w) = E(x,y)∼Di ℓ(fw(x), y). The
federated objective is
min
w
F(w) =
N
X
i=1
piFi(w),
N
X
i=1
pi = 1.
(1)
FedAvg performs E local epochs per round t to produce wt+1
i
,
followed by aggregation
wt+1 =
N
X
i=1
pi wt+1
i
.
(2)
B. LoRaWAN Constraints
A LoRaWAN transmission with payload B bytes, spread-
ing factor s, bandwidth W, and coding rate r has airtime
ToA(B, s, W, r) (e.g., [16]). In EU868, each sub-band en-
forces a 1% duty cycle: after a packet with airtime τ, the
device must idle for at least 99τ. With a per-frame maximum
MAC payload (e.g., Bmax=222 bytes for EU868 DR5) [22],
federated exchanges must satisfy
Packetization:
Buplink ≤Bmax,
(3)
Duty cycle:
∆tround ≥
X
k∈pkts
 1 + 99

ToAk,
(4)
where ToAk denotes airtime of fragment k and ∆tround is the
minimum wall-clock time imposed by regulation per update.
C. Design Goal
The goal is to minimize communication overhead while
preserving convergence, subject to LoRaWAN compliance:
min
Θ
X
t
B(t)
uplink
s.t.
LoRaWAN, ∆Acc ≤ϵ,
(5)
where Θ collects protocol knobs such as sparsity K, quanti-
zation level q, and scheduling parameters; ∆Acc denotes the
accuracy drop relative to a dense baseline, bounded by ϵ.
IV. CE-FEDAVG FRAMEWORK
A. Overview
CE-FedAvg preserves FedAvg’s round semantics but mod-
ifies messages:
1) Local training: Each client performs E epochs on data.
2) Sparse delta: Compute update ∆wi, list Top-K entries
(Ii), quantize to q-bit (float16/int8).
3) Packetization: Encode indices + q-quantized values into
one or more LoRaWAN-compliant packets.
4) Aggregation: Server reconstructs sparse updates, aggre-
gates, and issues compact refreshes.
The client-side procedure is summarized in Alg. 1, and the
server aggregation is given in Alg. 2.
B. Seed-Based Initialization
To eliminate the need for transmitting full model weights
in the initial round, CE-FedAvg employs a seed-based ini-
tialization mechanism. The server broadcasts only a small
pseudorandom seed s0, a CRC checksum, and the initial-
izer type (e.g., Kaiming or Xavier), allowing each client
to deterministically reconstruct the same model parameters
w0 = Init(s0) locally. This avoids dense model broadcast
while ensuring identical initial states.
C. Model Improvements (Lightweight CNN)
Communication-side compression is complemented with
architecture-level reductions. A compact model with reduced
channel widths, batch normalization, and optional depthwise
separable layers lowers parameter count while maintaining
accuracy with substantially fewer bytes per round. While not
universal, lightweight architectures can be tailored for low-
bandwidth settings (e.g., pruning or depthwise factorization),
and can be as impactful as communication-side compression.
D. Update Compression and Packetization
Let ∆w ∈Rd denote the flattened client update. CE-FedAvg
retains indices I for the Top-K magnitudes and quantizes their
values v using scale s and zero-point z:
ˆv = clip
 round
  v
s

+ z

,
v ≈s(ˆv −z).
(6)
Indices and quantized values are entropy-coded into a payload
≤maximum MAC payload; if the payload exceeds this limit,
the modem fragments it into frames and appends CRC.
Algorithm 1 CE-FedAvg (client i)
1: Input: seed s0, model wt, epochs E, sparsity K, quantizer
Qq
2: if t = 0 then
3:
w0 ←Init(s0)
4: end if
5: wt+1
i
←LocalTrain(wt, E)
6: ∆wi ←wt+1
i
−wt
7: (Ii, vi) ←TopK(∆wi, K)
8: ˆvi ←Qq(vi)
9: pkt ←Pack(Ii, ˆvi)
10: Transmit pkt over LoRaWAN (duty-cycle compliant)
Algorithm 2 Server aggregation
1: Input: packets {pkti}, current model wt
2: for each i do
3:
(Ii, ˆvi) ←Unpack(pkti)
4:
vi ←Q−1
q (ˆvi);
reconstruct sparse ∆wi
5: end for
6: wt+1 ←Aggregate
 {wt + ∆wi}

7: Broadcast compact refresh if needed
V. IMPLEMENTATION
A. Hardware Topology and Runtime Orchestration
Edge clients. Each physical client is an NVIDIA Jetson
Orin Nano that performs local training and inference, fol-
lowing typical edge-deployment architectures for distributed
intelligence [23]. To comply with LoRaWAN constraints while
keeping the Linux training stack unchanged, each Jetson
attaches to an external LoRaWAN modem: an ESP32 driving
a Semtech SX1262 transceiver. The Jetson and ESP32 com-
municate over UART using a compact binary framing. The
assembled modem prototype is shown in Fig. 1.
Gateway and core network. Uplinks and downlinks tra-
verse a Raspberry Pi 5 equipped with a Semtech SX1303
LoRaWAN Gateway HAT. The gateway forwards frames to
a LoRaWAN Network Server (LNS), where ChirpStack is
deployed. The FL server (aggregator) connects to the LNS via
MQTT, mapping application topics to client identifiers. This
setup follows LoRaWAN architecture principles [22], [17].
B. Software Stack
Training employs PyTorch under Flower 1.19.0. The server
implements the custom FedAvg-compatible strategy that (i)
accepts sparse, quantized uplinks; (ii) performs weighted
aggregation over reconstructed sparse deltas; and (iii) emits
sparse downlink refreshes during evaluation rounds. This strat-
egy extends the classical FedAvg algorithm [1], [8]. Table I
summarizes the configuration and default settings. The source
code of CE-FedAvg is available as an open repository1.
1https://github.com/aminrazaghi/CE-FedAvg
Fig. 1.
Prototype LoRaWAN modem used, consisting of an ESP32 micro-
controller, SX1262 transceiver, and external antenna.
C. Algorithm Overview
Seed-Based Initialization. At round t=0, the server trans-
mits a seed packet containing a 32-bit PRNG seed s0, the
initializer type, and a CRC32 over the deterministically gen-
erated w0. Each client reconstructs w0 locally and validates
the checksum (Alg. 1, l. 2–3). This procedure avoids dense
model broadcast and guarantees that heterogeneous devices
(CPU/GPU, library versions) start from identical weights.
Client-side update and uplink. Each client trains for E
local epochs (Alg. 1, l. 4), computes the model delta ∆w
(l. 5), selects Top-K indices by magnitude and quantizes the
corresponding values (l. 6–7). Indices (relative-offset encoded)
and quantized values are packed into LoRaWAN-compliant
frames and transmitted subject to duty-cycle limits (l. 8–9).
Server-side reconstruction and aggregation. The server
receives fragments, unpacks indices/values, dequantizes, and
reconstructs each sparse ∆wi (Alg. 2, l. 2–4). It then performs
weighted FedAvg over the union of indices to obtain wt+1
(l. 6). During evaluation or when drift is detected, the server
optionally sends a compact refresh delta (sparsified snapshot
difference) to clients (l. 7).
Timing
and
compliance. For each fragment of size
B ≤maximum MAC payload, the modem enforces standard-
compliant pacing using the LoRa time-on-air formula [16] and
the EU868 1% duty-cycle off-time. Thus, a J-fragment update
incurs a wall-clock lower bound of PJ
j=1(ToAj + 99 ToAj).
This schedule is enforced by the ESP32, ensuring transmis-
sions remain standard-compliant without server-side pacing.
Reliability and Integrity. All fragments include CRC16;
seed-init messages include CRC32 over w0. The modem may
retry uplinks with randomized backoff if MAC-layer confirms
are requested (disabled by default to conserve downlink). On
the server, missing fragments trigger a per-update timeout;
incomplete updates are discarded for that round to preserve
aggregation correctness. Similar reliability mechanisms are
reported for FL over LoRaWAN systems [6], [24].
VI. EVALUATION
A. Experimental Setup
Evaluation adopts a hybrid testbed–simulation method-
ology. The physical testbed comprises three NVIDIA Jet-
son Orin Nano clients, each connected over UART to an
TABLE I
LORAWAN CONFIGURATION AND DEFAULT LEARNING/PROTOCOL
SETTINGS
LoRaWAN Region, Classes, and Rate Control
Parameter
Setting
Notes
Region
EU868
LoRaWAN 1.0.3
Join
OTAA
Device class
C
reduces downlink latency
Data rate
DR5
SF7/125 kHz
Max MAC payload
222 B
EU868, DR5
Duty cycle
1% per sub-band
enforced per fragment
Uplink/Downlink
ALOHA
confirmed msg disabled
Default Hyperparameters and Protocol Knobs
Component
Setting
Notes
Local epochs (E)
3
1–5 used in ablations
Batch size
32
fixed across runs
Optimizer
SGD (mom. 0.9)
LR 0.01, decay on plateau
Sparsity (K)
0.10 (Top-10%)
down to 0.01 when needed
Quantization (uplink)
float16
int8 optional
ESP32+SX1262 LoRaWAN modem. Communication pro-
ceeds via a Raspberry Pi 5 gateway (SX1303) to a ChirpStack
network server. This setup validates LoRaWAN compliance,
packetization, and per-fragment duty-cycle timing. To assess
scalability, trace-driven simulations extend the system to 30
logical clients by replaying airtime traces measured on the
physical deployment.
Experiments use FEMNIST (LEAF) with writer-based non-
IID partitions (62 classes, 28×28 grayscale) [21]. A common
CNN baseline (two convolutional layers plus a fully connected
head) is compared against a lightweight CNN with three
convolutional blocks (Conv→BN→ReLU→Pool), an adaptive
global pooling layer, and a final fully connected classifier.
The lightweight model reduces parameters from ∼214.6k to
∼27.6k (–87%), lowering both local compute and nominal
update size. Activations and weights remain in float32 during
training; only transmitted deltas are quantized.
Unless otherwise noted, experiments run 30 rounds with the
default settings in Table I. Reported metrics include global test
accuracy (%), per-round communication volume (KB) in each
direction, and LoRaWAN feasibility via time-on-air (ToA) and
duty-cycle–imposed wall time for EU868. Each configuration
is repeated five times, and reported values represent the mean
over these runs. Error bars represent ±1 standard deviation.
B. Numerical Results
a) Lightweight architecture maintains accuracy at lower
cost.: Key quantitative results are reported in Table II. The
baseline CNN attains 85.0% accuracy with a model update
size of 858 KB per round. The lightweight CNN reaches 84.5%
with float16 while reducing payload to 50.3 KB (17× smaller).
Applying moderate sparsification trades bytes for minor accu-
racy loss: Top-10% achieves 83.4% (6.21 KB), whereas Top-
1% yields 63.6% (0.75 KB). See the accuracy–sparsification
trend in Fig. 2.
Fig. 2. Accuracy vs. Symmetric uplink/downlink Top-K sparsification. (Mean
over 5 runs; ±1 SD error bars)
TABLE II
KEY RESULTS ON FEMNIST UNDER LORAWAN-AWARE CE-FEDAVG
Setting
Acc. (%)
Uplink/Downlink (KB/rd)
Baseline CNN, dense
85.0
858
Lightweight, dense (fp16)
84.5
50.3
Lightweight, Top-10%
83.4
6.21
Lightweight, Top-5%
81.7
3.26
Lightweight, Top-2%
76.0
1.37
Lightweight, Top-1%
63.6
0.75
b) Rounds vs. local epochs (fixed 90 total epochs).:
With a fixed total training budget and Top-10% sparsification,
30 rounds × 3 epochs attains 83.4% accuracy, outperforming
45×2 (82.9%), 18×5 (81.4%), and 90×1 (81.8%). The trade-
off is illustrated in Fig. 3.
c) LoRaWAN Feasibility: Airtime and Duty-Cycle: For
EU868 at DR5, a 222 B frame has ToA ≈0.369 s; the 1% duty
cycle imposes ≈36.9 s off-time per frame, permitting roughly
97 frames per hour. For example, with Top-1% sparsification
(∼0.75 KB), the update payload is transmitted in 4 frag-
ments, totaling ≈1.47 s airtime and a duty-cycle–compliant
wall-clock duration of ≈1.52 min per update. Larger pay-
loads scale proportionally. These measurements confirm that
CE-FedAvg’s lightweight and sparse configurations remain
standard-compliant on LoRaWAN.
d) Convergence time vs. sparsity (K): Fig. 4 reports
accuracy over wall-clock time (minutes) under different Top-
K sparsification levels. The Top-5% configuration (K=0.05)
converges the fastest to 80% test accuracy, reaching this
threshold slightly earlier than Top-10% (K=0.10). In con-
trast, Top-2% (K=0.02) does not attain 80%, and Top-1%
(K=0.01) saturates around mid–60%. This result comple-
ments the byte–accuracy trade-off in Fig. 2: moderate sparsity
(5–10%) yields both competitive final accuracy and faster
time-to-target accuracy, while aggressive sparsification slows
learning and does not reach the same quality.
Fig. 3. Fixed 90 total epochs: 30 rounds × 3 epochs strikes the best balance.
(Mean over 5 runs; ±1 SD error bars)
Fig. 4. Convergence speed under different Top-K levels. Curves show global
accuracy vs. wall-clock time (minutes).
VII. DISCUSSION
A. Feasibility of FL over LoRaWAN
The results indicate that communication-aware model de-
sign and protocol choices can bring FL within LoRaWAN’s
tight constraints. Three factors are decisive: (i) a lightweight
model that trims parameters without sacrificing accuracy. (ii)
sparse, quantized updates that reduce communication over-
head. (iii) seed-based initialization that removes dense model
broadcast at t=0.
B. Rounds vs. local computation
Under a fixed total budget of 90 local epochs, 30×3
rounds×epochs offers the best balance (83.4%), with 45×2
close behind (82.9%). This suggests moderate local work per
round keeps the global model “fresh” without incurring exces-
sive communication or local overfitting. In duty-cycle–limited
settings, these schedules are preferable to very frequent short
rounds or very long local training.
C. Reliability, timing, and scheduling
Fragment-level CRC and per-fragment pacing on the mo-
dem enforce standard-compliant transmissions without server
pacing. In practice, missed fragments or sporadic downlink
availability can be handled by discarding incomplete updates
for that round or by issuing periodic sparse refreshes. Because
off-time dominates round time, when to schedule clients can
matter as much as how much they transmit.
D. Limitations
The physical testbed includes three clients; scalability to
larger cohorts is evaluated via trace-driven simulation rather
than a large over-the-air deployment. Experiments focus on
FEMNIST; broader workloads (e.g., metering, industrial, en-
vironmental/agriculture) remain to be explored. Energy per
update is inferred from airtime rather than direct power
measurements. Secure aggregation and differential privacy are
not enabled here, and would add bytes and latency that must be
budgeted. Finally, the design maintains LoRaWAN MAC/PHY,
which preserves compatibility but leaves admission control,
collisions, and ADR behavior to the underlying network.
E. Paths forward
Two directions appear immediately promising: (i) extending
CE-FedAvg to additional IoT workloads and larger models
representative of LoRaWAN deployments, while jointly adapt-
ing sparsity and quantization to optimize time-to-target accu-
racy under airtime and duty-cycle constraints. (ii) incorporat-
ing system and model level enhancements, such as structured
sparsification, error-feedback mechanisms, or lightweight ar-
chitectural adaptations, to improve convergence without in-
creasing payload size. System-level strategies, including ADR-
aware or staggered client selection and loss-resilient update
handling, may further mitigate collisions and raise feasible
round rates at scale. Security and privacy add-ons (e.g., secure
aggregation and differential privacy) should be integrated
with explicit airtime budgets and validated under realistic
deployment conditions.
VIII. CONCLUSION
This
work
presented
CE-FedAvg,
a
communication-
efficient FL framework that operates fully within the Lo-
RaWAN standard. Seed-based initialization, a lightweight
CNN, and sparse/quantized updates jointly reduce update
payload from hundreds of kilobytes to only a few kilo-
bytes while maintaining competitive accuracy on non-IID
FEMNIST. On a LoRaWAN testbed with Jetson Orin Nano
clients and an SX1303 gateway, Top-1% updates complete
in ≈5.3 min at EU868 DR5, enabling ∼12 rounds per hour;
Top-5% offers a favorable accuracy–bytes trade-off at 3.26 KB
per update. These findings indicate that federated learning
over LoRaWAN is feasible in practice without MAC/PHY
modifications. Future work will integrate security primitives
and validate broader tasks at larger scales.
REFERENCES
[1] B. McMahan et al., “Communication-efficient learning of deep networks
from decentralized data,” in Proc. of AISTATS, 2017, pp. 1273–1282.
[2] P. Kairouz et al., “Advances and open problems in federated learning,”
Foundations and Trends in Machine Learning, vol. 14, no. 1–2, pp.
1–210, 2021.
[3] S. Ahmad, et al., “Sustainable environmental monitoring via energy and
information efficient multinode placement,” in IEEE Internet of Things
Journal, vol. 10, no. 24, pp. 22065-22079, 2023.
[4] European Union, “General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR),” Regu-
lation (EU) 2016/679, Apr. 27, 2016.
[5] A. Singh and S. S. Borkotoky, “Federated learning over LoRa networks:
Simulator design and performance evaluation,” arXiv:2508.10574, 2025.
[6] O. Torres-Sanchez et al., “Federated learning framework for LoRaWAN-
enabled IIoT communication: A case study,” IEEE Internet of Things
Journal, vol. 12, no. 13, pp. 24944–24957, 2025.
[7] N. Llisterri Gim´enez, J. M. Sol´e, and F. Freitag, “Embedded federated
learning over a LoRa mesh network,” Pervasive and Mobile Computing,
vol. 93, p. 101819, 2023.
[8] K. Bonawitz, H. Eichner, W. Grieskamp, D. Huba, A. Ingerman, V.
Ivanov, C. Kiddon, J. Koneˇcn´y, S. Mazzocchi, B. McMahan et al.,
“Towards federated learning at scale: System design,” in Proc. 2nd
SysML Conf., 2019.
[9] A. F. Aji and K. Heafield, “Sparse communication for distributed
gradient descent,” in Proc. Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP), 2017, pp. 440–445.
[10] D. Alistarh, D. Grubic, J. Li, R. Tomioka, and M. Vojnovic, “QSGD:
Communication-efficient SGD via gradient quantization and encod-
ing,” in Proc. 31st Int. Conf. Neural Information Processing Systems
(NeurIPS), 2017, pp. 1709–1720.
[11] F. Sattler, S. Wiedemann, K. R. M¨uller, and W. Samek, “Robust and
communication-efficient federated learning from non-i.i.d. data,” IEEE
Trans. Neural Networks and Learning Systems, vol. 31, no. 9, pp.
3400–3413, 2020.
[12] A. Ghosh, J. Chung, D. Yin, and K. Ramchandran, “An efficient
framework for clustered federated learning,” in Proc. 34th Conf. Neural
Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2020.
[13] H. Chen, S. Huang, D. Zhang, M. Xiao, M. Skoglund, and H. V. Poor,
“Federated Learning Over Wireless IoT Networks With Optimized
Communication and Resources,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 9,
no. 17, pp. 16592–16605, Sep. 2022.
[14] D. C. Nguyen, M. Ding, P. N. Pathirana, A. Seneviratne, J. Li, and
H. V. Poor, “Federated Learning for Internet of Things: A Comprehen-
sive Survey,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 23, no. 3,
pp. 1622–1658, 2021.
[15] I. Kaur and A. J. Jadhav, “Federated Learning in IoT: A Survey from a
Resource-Constrained Perspective,” in Proc. 2023 Int. Conf. on Artificial
Intelligence Robotics, Signal and Image Processing (AIRoSIP), pp. 376–
381, 2023.
[16] B. Reynders, W. Meert, and S. Pollin, “Power and spreading factor
control in LoRa networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Communications
(ICC), pp. 1–6, 2017.
[17] M. Bor, U. Roedig, T. Voigt, and J. M. Alonso, “Do LoRa low-power
wide-area networks scale?” in Proc. ACM Int. Conf. on Modeling,
Analysis and Simulation of Wireless and Mobile Systems (MSWiM),
2016, pp. 59–67.
[18] Z. Yang, M. Chen, W. Saad, C. S. Hong, and M. Shikh-Bahaei, “Energy-
efficient federated learning over wireless communication networks,”
IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 20, no. 3, pp.
1935–1949, 2021.
[19] R. Jin, X. He, and H. Dai, “Communication efficient federated learning
with energy awareness over wireless networks,” IEEE Transactions on
Wireless Communications, vol. 21, no. 7, pp. 5204–5219, 2022.
[20] R. V. da Silva, O. L. A. Lopez, and R. D. Souza, “Energy-aware
federated learning with distributed user sampling and multichannel
ALOHA,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 27, no. 10, pp. 2867–
2871, 2023.
[21] S. Caldas, P. Wu, T. Li, J. Koneˇcn´y, H. B. McMahan, V. Smith,
and A. Talwalkar, “LEAF: A benchmark for federated settings,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1812.01097v3, 2019.
[22] LoRa Alliance, “LoRaWAN 1.0.3 specification,” 2018. [Online]. Avail-
able: https://lora-alliance.org/
[23] A. Aral and I. Brandi´c, “Learning spatiotemporal failure dependencies
for resilient edge computing services,” IEEE Trans. Parallel and Dis-
tributed Systems, vol. 32, no. 7, pp. 1578–1590, 2021.
[24] F. Busacca, et al., “FedLoRa: IoT Spectrum Sensing Through Fast
and Energy-Efficient Federated Learning in LoRa Networks,” in Proc.
2024 IEEE 21st International Conference on Mobile Ad-Hoc and Smart
Systems (MASS), 2024, pp. 47-54.
